Rebundling The Data Platform Blog Post (#111)
dagster-io/dagster-website: pages/blog/rebundling-the-data-platform.mdx

What you are left with is the image in the Unbundling Airflow article. A constellation of tools, each with their own internal logical model of the assets or entities they manage.

<a className="bg-black group block" target="_blank" href="/posts/rebundling-the-data-platform/unbundling_airflow.jpg"> 
    <span className="hidden group-hover:block z-10 mt-4 ml-4 absolute text-black text-sm border border-black rounded-full px-2 py-1">Click to Expand</span>
    <img className="relative group-hover:opacity-95 transition" src="/posts/rebundling-the-data-platform/unbundling_airflow.jpg"/>
</a>

> ## Unbundling creates a whole new set of problems.

Reviewer: Consider taking out "is lunacy" - could be interpreted as a little ad hominem - and jumping straight to "a terrible endstate".

Reviewer 2: Going to say: "I don’t think anyone believes that this is an ideal end state, and the post itself notes that consolidation will be a necessity. Having this many tools without a coherent, centralized control plane is lunacy, and a terrible endstate for data practitioners and their stakeholders."

Reviewer: That's great. Keeps the provocation without the ad hominem.

I don’t think anyone believes that this is an ideal end state. Having this many tools without a coherent, centralized control plane is lunacy, and a terrible endstate for data practitioners and their stakeholders. It results in an operationally fragile data platform that leaves everyone in a constant state of confusion about what ran, what's supposed to run, and whether things ran in the right order. And yet, this is the reality we are slouching toward in this “unbundled” world.

>Having this many tools without a coherent, centralized control plane is lunacy, and a terrible endstate for data practitioners and their stakeholders.

> Some teams eschew orchestration all together and instead use the barebones, cron-based scheduling systems the come with these products. Without any centralized orchestration, you are left with overlapping cron schedules and “hope and pray” approach to operational robustness. One tool starts at midnight, the next, blindly, at 2 am, and if sometime goes wrong or is unexpectedly delayed, you are left scrambling to debug within disconnected tools and your data assets are stale. And if you need *any* computation in a programming language like Python, you are left with very little, if any, support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some teams eschew orchestration altogether and instead use the barebones, cron-based scheduling systems the come with these products. Without any centralized orchestration, you are left with overlapping cron schedules and “hope and pray” approach to operational robustness. One tool starts at midnight, the next, blindly, at 2 am, and if sometime goes wrong or is unexpectedly delayed, you are left scrambling to debug within disconnected tools and your data assets are stale. And if you need *any* computation in a programming language like Python, you are left with very little, if any, support.
```

Reviewer 2: Good feedback will address in follow on chanbe

Reviewer 2: change

<img src="/posts/rebundling-the-data-platform/unbundling_evolution.jpg"/>

> Even when an orchestrator is used it knows less and less about the inner workings of the data platform and assets it manages, you are left with a tool with less operational richness that also does not provide a unified “single pane of glass” for your platform. Now you have operational silos, and are forced to do costly, invasive integrations with tools to get the most basic information about the assets in and status of your data platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even when an orchestrator is used, it knows less about the inner workings of the data platform and assets it manages, you are left with a tool with less operational richness that also does not provide a unified “single pane of glass” for your platform. You end up with operational silos and are forced to do costly, invasive integrations with tools to get the most basic information about the assets in and status of your data platform.
```

Reviewer 2: "Even when an orchestrator is used it knows little about the inner workings of the data platform and assets it manages. You are left with a tool with less operational richness that also does not provide a unified “single pane of glass” for your platform. Now you have operational silos, and are forced to do costly, invasive integrations with tools to get the most basic information about the assets in and status of your data platform."

## From imperative tasks to declarative assets
I received a number of messages from others in the ecosystem saying like “shots fired!” specifically because of this quote in the article:

_"It’s hard to make predictions in the ever evolving data landscape, but I am not sure if we need a better Airflow. Building a better Airflow feels like trying to optimize writing code that shouldn’t have been written in the first place."_

The reality is that *I couldn’t agree more*. Earlier in the year the Dagster core team arrived at the similar conclusion. While there was a lot of value in building a better task-based orchestrator, it wasn’t in line with where we saw the ecosystem evolving and what was needed to tame the huge array of problems that we bucket under <a target="_blank" href="https://dagster.io/blog/decade-of-data">Big Complexity.</a> Every company has a data platform, and every company needs a cohesive data management solution and a control plane in that platform. Orchestration is a part of that story, but not the whole story.

> We still need bundling. We need to do so horizontally to have a coherent view and robust operations as data traverses and is processed in Databricks, dbt, an ML training pipeline, and the myriad other systems in the data platform. We also need vertical bundling, so that there is some base layer of quality, lineage, and observability that spans those tools and teams. Orchestration is the natural center of gravity for such a system. This line of thinking led us to our next generation of product: **software-defined assets**.

Reviewer: I think a key thing to point out is that tools like dbt, continual, etc. _are_ vertically bundled, and that's part of what makes them so attractive. Therefore, bundling is a feature, not a bug.

## Rebundling is here: Software-Defined Assets

> Today we released Dagster 0.14.0, and it contains a new concept: software-defined assets. A proper introduction will be published next week, but tl;dr: It is a fundamentally new approach to orchestration that orients around _assets_ rather than _tasks_. This enables not just orchestration, but also a fully integrated understanding of data assets that provides a base layer of lineage, observability, and data quality monitoring for your entire platform. Dagster users can use it directly with our built-in tools, and more specialized ecosystem tools can build on top of and integrate with this base layer as well.

Reviewer: I think this needs more explicit statement of how this resolves the bundling tension that was raised in the beginning of the post. Otherwise, it feels like a bit of a jump into "now here's some cool stuff".

<a className="bg-black group block" target="_blank" href="/posts/rebundling-the-data-platform/op_graph.jpg"> 
    <span className="hidden group-hover:block z-10 mt-4 ml-4 absolute text-black text-sm border border-black rounded-full px-2 py-1">Click to Expand</span>
    <img className="relative group-hover:opacity-95 transition" src="/posts/rebundling-the-data-platform/op_graph.jpg"/>
</a>

Software-designed assets completely change the mental model. Dagster ingests the Airbyte sources and dbt models natively, interleaves them directly with Python data assets, and models them all in Dagster as **software-defined assets**.

<a className="bg-black group block" target="_blank" href="/posts/rebundling-the-data-platform/asset_graph.jpg"> 
    <span className="hidden group-hover:block z-10 mt-4 ml-4 absolute text-black text-sm border border-black rounded-full px-2 py-1">Click to Expand</span>
    <img className="relative group-hover:opacity-95 transition" src="/posts/rebundling-the-data-platform/asset_graph.jpg"/>
</a>

## The graph you have been waiting for.

> From this single graph you can view, operate, and observe all the data assets in your platform. You can see their lineage, metadata, their status in the warehouse, navigate to the last run that produced them, and more. It is a massive leap forward for data management.

Reviewer: Need to somehow tie it back to bundling / the main thrust of the post here.

---
layout: 'BlogPost'
status: 'published'
title: 'Rebundling the Data Platform'
excerpt: "A fascinating post made the rounds yesterday in the data community entitled 'The Unbundling of Airflow'. It is provocative and deserves the high level of interest it earned, but I don’t think anyone believes that this is an ideal end state..."
date: '2022-02-17'
authors: ['schrockn']
tags: []
coverImage: '/posts/rebundling-the-data-platform/cover.png'
featured: true

---

A fascinating post made the rounds yesterday in the data community entitled <a target="_blank" href="https://blog.fal.ai/the-unbundling-of-airflow-2/">The Unbundling of Airflow</a>. It is provocative and deserves the high level of interest it earned.

> The articles describes how the Airflow DAG is being “eaten” from the inside out. Whether it is ingestion tools (Airbyte, Fivetran, Meltano), transformational tools (dbt), reverse ETL tools (Census, Hightouch), metrics layers (Transform), ML-focused systems (such as Continual) and others: Computations are outsourced to specialized tools that have their own concepts and self-manage some degree of orchestration in their own domain. For example, a dbt project with hundreds of models that would have corresponded to hundreds of manually created Airflow Tasks has been collapsed into a single Airflow task that outsources execution to the dbt runner.

Reviewer 3: a little jarring that all the preceding examples are bare names in parens (e.g. "(Census, Hightouch)" but this one prefixed with "such as"

<a className="bg-black group block" target="_blank" href="/posts/rebundling-the-data-platform/unbundling_airflow.jpg"> 
    <span className="hidden group-hover:block z-10 mt-4 ml-4 absolute text-black text-sm border border-black rounded-full px-2 py-1">Click to Expand</span>
    <img className="relative group-hover:opacity-95 transition" src="/posts/rebundling-the-data-platform/unbundling_airflow.jpg"/>
</a>

## Unbundling creates a whole new set of problems.

I don’t think anyone believes that this is an ideal end state, and the post itself notes that consolidation will be a necessity. Having this many tools without a coherent, centralized control plane is lunacy, and a terrible endstate for data practitioners and their stakeholders. It results in an operationally fragile data platform that leaves everyone in a constant state of confusion about what ran, what's supposed to run, and whether things ran in the right order. And yet, this is the reality we are slouching toward in this “unbundled” world.

>Having this many tools without a coherent, centralized control plane is lunacy, and a terrible endstate for data practitioners and their stakeholders.

> 

Reviewer 3: "systems that come with these products"

> Some teams eschew orchestration altogether and instead use the barebones, cron-based scheduling systems the come with these products. Without any centralized orchestration, you are left with overlapping cron schedules and a “hope and pray” approach to operational robustness. One tool starts at midnight, the next, blindly, at 2 am, and if sometime goes wrong or is unexpectedly delayed, you are left scrambling to debug stale or broken assets within disconnected tools. If you need *any* computation in a programming language like Python, you are left with very little, if any, support.

Reviewer 3: "if something goes wrong"

<img src="/posts/rebundling-the-data-platform/unbundling_evolution.jpg"/>

Even when an orchestrator is used it knows little about the inner workings of the data platform and assets it manages. You are left with a tool with less operational richness that also does not provide a unified “single pane of glass” for your platform. Now you have operational silos, and are forced to do costly, invasive integrations with tools to get the most basic information about the assets in and status of your data platform.

Ananth Packkildurai, the author of the Data Engineering Weekly newsletter, summarizes this state of affairs well:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">MDS is a set of vendor tools that solve niche data problems (lineage, orchestration, quality) with the side effect of creating a disjointed data workflow that makes data folks lives more complicated.</p>&mdash; Ananth Packkildurai (@ananthdurai) <a href="https://twitter.com/ananthdurai/status/1479111266866139136?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">January 6, 2022</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

## From imperative tasks to declarative assets

> I received a number of messages from others in the ecosystem saying like “shots fired!” specifically because of this quote in the article:

Reviewer 3: "saying things like "shots fired!""

_"It’s hard to make predictions in the ever evolving data landscape, but I am not sure if we need a better Airflow. Building a better Airflow feels like trying to optimize writing code that shouldn’t have been written in the first place."_

> The reality is that *I couldn’t agree more*. Earlier in the year the Dagster core team arrived at the similar conclusion. While there was a lot of value in building a better task-based orchestrator, it wasn’t in line with where we saw the ecosystem evolving.  We saw more and more adjacent tools adopting a declarative, asset-based philosophy. We decided that an orchesrator that embraced that philosophy was needed to tame the huge array of problems that we bucket under <a target="_blank" href="https://dagster.io/blog/decade-of-data">Big Complexity.</a> Every company has a data platform, and every company needs a cohesive data management solution and a control plane in that platform. Orchestration is a part of that story, but not the whole story.

Reviewer 3: "arrived at a similar conclusion"

> Finally Python feels like a first-class citizen in the modern data stack.

First, it enables the authorship of software-defined assets directly in Python. The users no longer create a centralized DAG. Instead they author Python functions that represent a particular asset, and declare their upstream dependencies right inline using an elegant Pythonic API. This API is a huge step forward for practitioners building production ETL or model-training pipelines in Python. 

Python is essential in the modern data ecosystem, used by millions of data practitioners of all stripes. It matters and it is not going anywhere. With software-defined assets in Dagster, Python finally feels like a first-class citizen in the modern data stack.

> All your assets are now directly viewable and operable in a single, unified fabric.

> Second, it enables the explicit modeling and operation of entities such as dbt models and Airbyte destinations **natively** in Dagster. This means the user is still defining these concepts in the tool of their choice, but Dagster pulls in this information via an integration which understands both its logical model and how to execute it.

Reviewer 4: It would be more accurate to say "tables in Airbyte destinations" or "tables sync'd by Airbyte" here.

<a className="bg-black group block" target="_blank" href="/posts/rebundling-the-data-platform/op_graph.jpg"> 
    <span className="hidden group-hover:block z-10 mt-4 ml-4 absolute text-black text-sm border border-black rounded-full px-2 py-1">Click to Expand</span>
    <img className="relative group-hover:opacity-95 transition" src="/posts/rebundling-the-data-platform/op_graph.jpg"/>
</a>

Software-designed assets completely change the mental model. Dagster ingests the Airbyte sources and dbt models natively, interleaves them directly with Python data assets, and models them all in Dagster as **software-defined assets**.

<a className="bg-black group block" target="_blank" href="/posts/rebundling-the-data-platform/asset_graph.jpg"> 
    <span className="hidden group-hover:block z-10 mt-4 ml-4 absolute text-black text-sm border border-black rounded-full px-2 py-1">Click to Expand</span>
    <img className="relative group-hover:opacity-95 transition" src="/posts/rebundling-the-data-platform/asset_graph.jpg"/>
</a>

> The code to construct this is surpsingly minimal. We are leveraging the work already done in other tools to construct this unified view and then interleaving it with the python asset. The system constructs the DAG on your behalf, connecting the assets via their names.

Reviewer 3: "surprisingly minimal"

<img src="/posts/rebundling-the-data-platform/asset_code.png"/>

## The graph you have been waiting for.

From this single graph you can view, operate, and observe all the data assets in your platform. You can see their lineage, metadata, their status in the warehouse, navigate to the last run that produced them, and more. It, in effect, "rebundles" the data platform by natively understanding the asset-based approach embraced by modern data tools. It is a massive leap forward for data management.

> Note that these two graphs co-exist. The graph of ops is an execution graph that is able to materialize the graph of assets. This means that many assets can be materialized by a single op, as is the case with Airbyte and Dbt in the above example. This also means that software-defined assets are built on Dagster’s underlying, battle-tested orchestration framework and infrastructure. And you can also code directly against those abstractions for pure workflow use cases, which will continue to exist.

Reviewer 4: Dbt -> dbt

Reviewer 2: good catch! could have causes an international incident

> Note that these two graphs co-exist. The graph of ops is an execution graph that is able to materialize the graph of assets. This means that many assets can be materialized by a single op, as is the case with Airbyte and dbt in the above example. This also means that software-defined assets are built on Dagster’s underlying, battle-tested orchestration framework and infrastructure. And you can also code directly against those abstractions for pure workflow use cases, which will continue to exist.

Reviewer 5: > The graph of ops...

If we intend the audience for this blog post to include non-Dagster users, it might be helpful to define "op" or provide a little more context the first time it appears. We may just want to avoid the term entirely since we don't use it above when we first introduce the op graph.

Reviewer 5: In particular because we don't use the word "op" when we introduce the op graph, it's might not be immediately obvious which graph is "the graph of ops" if I don't know what an op is. (Maybe the similarity to operator is enough though?)

>Having this many tools without a coherent, centralized control plane is lunacy, and a terrible endstate for data practitioners and their stakeholders.

Some teams eschew orchestration all together and instead use the barebones, cron-based scheduling systems the come with these products. Without any centralized orchestration, you are left with overlapping cron schedules and “hope and pray” approach to operational robustness. One tool starts at midnight, the next, blindly, at 2 am, and if sometime goes wrong or is unexpectedly delayed, you are left scrambling to debug within disconnected tools and your data assets are stale. And if you need *any* computation in a programming language like Python, you are left with very little, if any, support.

> <img src="/posts/rebundling-the-data-platform/unbundling_evolution.jpg"/>

Reviewer 2: I think the image is very effective.

Even when an orchestrator is used it knows less and less about the inner workings of the data platform and assets it manages, you are left with a tool with less operational richness that also does not provide a unified “single pane of glass” for your platform. Now you have operational silos, and are forced to do costly, invasive integrations with tools to get the most basic information about the assets in and status of your data platform.

Ananth Packkildurai, the author of the Data Engineering Weekly newsletter, summarizes this state of affairs well:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">MDS is a set of vendor tools that solve niche data problems (lineage, orchestration, quality) with the side effect of creating a disjointed data workflow that makes data folks lives more complicated.</p>&mdash; Ananth Packkildurai (@ananthdurai) <a href="https://twitter.com/ananthdurai/status/1479111266866139136?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">January 6, 2022</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

## From imperative tasks to declarative assets

> I received a number of messages from others in the ecosystem saying like “shots fired!” specifically because of this quote in the article:

Reviewer 2: I'm deliberately choosing a more conversational, informal tone.
